Despite the fact that rodents are considered to be the infectious source of hantavirus for humans, another route of transmission was demonstrated. Andes virus (ANDV) has been responsible for most of the cases recorded in Argentina. Person-to-person transmission of ANDV Sout lineage was described during an outbreak of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in southwest Argentina. In this study, we analyzed 4 clusters that occurred in 2 disease-endemic areas for different ANDV lineages. We found new evidence of interhuman transmission for ANDV Sout lineage and described the first event in which another lineage, ANDV Cent BsAs, was implicated in this mechanism of transmission. On the basis of epidemiologic and genetic data, we concluded that person-to-person spread of the virus likely took place during the prodromal phase or shortly after it ended, since close and prolonged contact occurred in the events analyzed here, and the incubation period was 15-24 days.

T he genus Hantavirus is a growing group of rodent- borne viruses of worldwide distribution that cause human diseases. Hantavirus is the only genus of the family Bunyaviridae, which comprises rodentborne viruses. Specific species of rodents are natural reservoirs for different hantavirus types. In America, hantaviruses are mainly carried by sigmodontine rodents. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) was first described in North America in 1993

Six different ANDV lineages have been reported to cause HPS in Argentina: ANDV Sout in the southwest region; ANDV Cent BsAs, ANDV Cent Lec, and ANDV Cent Plata in the central region; and ANDV Nort Orán and ANDV Nort Bermejo in the northwest region. The definition of these 6 lineages was previously established on the basis of nucleotide and amino acid differences

We analyzed 4 case clusters of hantavirus infection and present new evidence for interhuman transmission of ANDV Sout lineage. We also describe the first event in which another lineage, ANDV Cent BsAs, has been implicated in this rare but already proven route of transmission.

Materials and Methods



Study Population

Thirteen HPS cases that occurred during the second half of 2002 in Argentina were analyzed in this study (Table

Genetic Characterization

Ten clot samples and 1 serum sample were subjected to viral detection methods as described

Results



Epidemiologic Findings

The cases were grouped into 4 clusters (Table

Cluster 2 (C2) was a rural cluster within a family of 5 that lived in a cabin. Rodent infestation of the house and surrounding areas was evident. The onset of symptoms of 3 of the 4 case-patients occurred during a 12-day period (Table

Cluster 3 (C3), a rural cluster composed of 4 friends (cases C3-1 to C3-4), was similar to the previous cluster since all became ill during a period of 20 days (Table

Cluster 4 (C4) involved a case-patient (C4-a) and a person he came into contact with (C4-b), and a third person who came into contact with C4-b. The index patient lived and worked in Neuquén City, where neither HPS cases nor rodent infestation had been registered. He traveled to Mar del Plata in the province of Buenos Aires, 1,005 km northeast of Neuquén City, where he remained for a few days while attending a meeting. His first symptoms (fever and myalgia) began before his return to Neuquén from Mar del Plata, 23 days after he returned from a vacation in Villa La Angostura, a small town surrounded by a wilderness area, 447 km southwest of Neuquén City (Figure

Viral Characterization

Nucleotide sequence comparisons of G2 fragment between sequences from the 11 cases, 5 nonlinked (NL) cases, and 5 previously published ANDV lineages are shown in Table

Assessment of the Route of Transmission

Rodent transmission is the most common route of hantavirus infection. However, when a new HPS case is suspected, if rodent exposure was not evident, for interhuman   transmission to be suspected, one must 1) find a epidemiologic link with a previous case-patient (index casepatient); 2) confirm 100% viral nucleotide identity with the index patient in the fragments analyzed; and 3) assuming that the secondary patient could have been exposed to infectious rodents in the same or a different place than the index patient, determine the probability that both viral strains have 100% nucleotide identity in the fragments analyzed.

In C1, only C1-f had an evident rodent exposure. The only risk for C1-s was the close contact with C1-f during his prodromal phase. In C4, only C4-a had an evident risk of rodent transmission because he had visited a diseaseendemic area. The only risky activity of C4-b was close contact with C4-a during the 14-hour bus trip. C4-c was in contact with C4-b at several times after the latter returned from Neuquén. All nucleotide fragment comparisons showed 100% identity for G1, G2, and S-NCR for C1 and C4. We analyzed viral variability in the areas of circulation of AND Cent Bs As and ANDV Sout lineages by comparing viral nucleotide sequences from previous HPS cases and found a positive correlation between geographic distance and genetic distance for each ANDV lineage (data not shown). Each ANDV lineage showed a significant degree of variability between the supposed sites of exposure in C1 for C1-f and C1-s and in C4 for C4-a and C4-b. In summary, C1-s, C4-b, and C4-c were infected by interhuman transmission.

Discussion

From July to December 2002, 31 HPS cases were reported in Argentina, 13 of which were included in this study because they occurred as linked cases grouped in 4 clusters. Three of these clusters occurred in the province of Buenos Aires, where previous cases were isolated and sporadic

In summary, virus transmission from one person to another likely occurs during the prodromal phase or shortly after it ends. Previously published reports of person-toperson transmission did not provide details of clinical manifestation at the moment of contact, but several infections occurred while some HPS patients were initially hospitalized; other patients contracted the infection after being in contact with a recently symptomatic case-patient

Since interhuman transmission of ANDV occurred in Argentina in 1996, the major question that clinicians have been facing is what to do about personal protection and patient isolation. The answer to physicians likely to encounter HPS patients is to follow the recommended universal precautions. However, the findings presented here suggest that the most probable period of virus spread would be during the days before medical attention is sought. For this reason, the family or those who had close contact with an HPS patient during the prodromal phase seem to have more risk of interhuman infection than do clinicians. In the management of contacts of HPS cases caused by ANDV, epidemiologists usually give more relevance to serologic tests than to clinical surveillance. Whether serologic tests on specimens from asymptomatic contacts are worthwhile should be determined. Such results are usually misinterpreted since a negative serologic test result does not mean that the contact could not be incubating the infection, and a few days later, HPS symptoms could develop. This negative serologic result usually leads to delay in medical consultation. In our opinion, a strict clinical surveillance would be more valuable: contacts of HPS patients need to be monitored and advised to immediately look for medical evaluation as soon as fever or any other prodromal symptom develops. In this circumstance, a fast laboratory diagnosis is essential so virus spread can be avoided and early intensive care and treatment initiated. Patients with a confirmed diagnosis should be transferred to a unit skilled in intensive cardiopulmonary care. A previous study suggests that the earlier a patient is hospitalized, the higher the probability of survival

Further studies will be necessary to understand more about this rare mechanism of virus spread. More information of virus variability of all the ANDV lineages will also help differentiate an instance of common rodent exposure from a new event of person-to-person transmission, especially in patients with a travel history.