decades, with cases recognized from 1959

Materials and Methods



Ascertainment of cases.

TriCore Corporation and the University of New Mexico (UNM) School of Medicine offer a rapid diagnostic referral center that processes more samples for hantavirus infection than any other center in North America. In addition, the majority of patients with acute SN virus infection in the Four Corners states are referred to UNM Hospital for treatment. Thus, TriCore/UNM in Albuquerque diagnoses or treats most patients with HCPS in the Four Corners states. The remaining cases were ascertained through the state departments of health. Risk activities and exposure histories were obtained according to standard protocols

Hantavirus strip immunoblot assay.

The method for our hantavirus strip immunoblot assay used recombinant nucleocapsid and G1 glycoprotein antigens of SN virus

El Nin ˜o standard departure.

The multivariate El Nin ˜osouthern oscillation (ENSO) index is used as a measure of the coupled oceanic-atmospheric character of ENSO events. The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) tracks the index, which is designed to predict the likely meteorologic consequences of each ENSO. The index considers the following 6 parameters: sea-level pressure, zonal and meridional components of the surface wind, sea-surface temperature, surface-air temperature, and total-cloudiness fraction of the sky

Precipitation data. Precipitation at case sites was estimated by interpolating reported monthly rainfall data from 310 cooperative weather stations located in the Four Corners region. These data were downloaded from the NOAA Web site. Geographic locations of the weather stations were linked with the associated precipitation information, and the data were stored in a raster-based geographic information system (GIS) with a pixel resolution of 0.01Њ. Annual precipitation was aggregated from the monthly data, and a 20-year average precipitation pattern was recorded for each station. The procedure was repeated for the total precipitation recorded for 1998.

Precipitation at sites of exposure for patients with acute SN virus infection was estimated by separately interpolating precipitation surfaces for the 20-year average and for 1998, by using surfacegenerating algorithms residing in the GIS. The geographic locations of case patients were overlaid on the precipitation surfaces for the 20-year average and for 1998, and the estimated precipitation values were extracted. The change in precipitation for 1998, in comparison with the 20-year average, was calculated for each site of exposure.

To test the hypothesis that the local increases in precipitation were associated with HCPS cases, we plotted the distribution of cases in relation to the 1998 deviation from the 20-year average and compared it with 1998 precipitation deviation throughout the entire region. We predicted that if the association of ENSO with HCPS occurred, cases would be more common in areas with aboveaverage precipitation. We compared the cumulative distribution of precipitation for the region with the distribution of precipitation for case sites by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov 2-sample test.

Results

Hantavirus outbreak of 1998-1999. The outbreak of HCPS in 1993 followed a significant ENSO event of 1991-1992, and the outbreak continued into 1994. The lag time between the ENSO event and the increase in caseload was ∼1 year (figure

In 1997, there was a strong ENSO event that began in midyear (figure

The demographic characteristics of patients in the new outbreak were similar to those in the 1993-1994 outbreak (table

Figure

Precipitation data showed substantial areas throughout the region with annual precipitation that was at or above the previous 20-year average (figure

Risk factors for infection. Patients or their surrogates were questioned in an attempt to ascertain what risk activities may have led to infection. In deciding the most probable site of a patient's exposure, we favored known exposure at sites where live rodents had been seen, trapped, or handled or at sites where rodent infestation was clearly evident. Such exposures were common among patients affected by the 1998-1999 outbreak. As in previous investigations, we found that most exposures occurred in or around the home (table 2)

A single case patient provided a history that seemed to offer compelling evidence of an outdoor exposure. This patient, a contractor, had removed insulation from the side of a building and had noted that the insulation was extensively contaminated with rodent droppings. He stood in close proximity to the insulation and felt that he had inhaled particles of the aerosolized insulation; this event occurred ∼3 weeks before the onset of his symptoms.

Discussion

We have shown that the ENSO event of 1997-1998 was followed by an outbreak of infection with SN hantavirus in 1998-1999. Although the outbreak was widely feared and was predicted in the press and by public health authorities, the expectation that it could be held in check by a continuous and extensive public education campaign led some to believe that an outbreak would not occur. It is impossible to know with certainty that the ENSO actually caused the increased incidence of SN virus infection. Increased awareness of the disease surrounding the ENSO event in 1997 could have influenced clinical recognition of the syndrome by health care providers. However, when the outbreak is considered in the context of the previous experience with the 1993-1994 outbreak and the low incidence of HCPS in 1995-1997, ENSO events should be seriously considered as precipitating factors in such outbreaks