Introduction

As with many organisms, population abundance of small mammals fluctuates greatly both temporally and spatially

Sin Nombre virus is a rodent-borne zoonotic pathogen that can spill over to humans causing severe morbidity and mortality

The potential for voles to influence transmission of SNV among deer mice is limited to three hypothesized outcomes: (1) no effect, if voles have a similar host competence or do not interact with deer mice; (2) an amplification effect (see

Hantavirus-host relationships, however, are highly specific: only the specific co-adapted host species is likely to develop a chronic infection and shed large quantities of virus into the environment for extended periods

Numerous studies of vole and mouse interactions demonstrate competition in nature, with voles influencing contact rates and excluding mice from some habitats (e.g.,

In this study, we use monthly data on rodent dynamics from three live trapping grids from a 14-year continuous dataset from Cascade County, central Montana. We use hantavirus ESAP from two of the three grids over the entire study period, and over a 4-year period for the third grid. Prior to examining relationships between voles and ESAP in deer mice, we examine possible factors which may result in erroneous interpretations at each trapping grid: coincidental correlation between voles and ESAP in deer mice, correlation between vole and deer mouse abundance, and if ESAP in deer mice is influenced by deer mouse abundance (density-dependent transmission; see

Where appropriate, we control for confounding factors in our analyses.

Materials and methods

This investigation was undertaken on three live-trapping grids (grid numbers 10, 11 and 12) located near Cascade, Montana (46°59.3′N, 111°35.3′W, 1,408 m asl). The three trapping grids were in grassland habitat supporting an active cattle ranch

Blood samples, which were later tested for antibodies to SNV, were routinely collected each month from grids 11 and 12. Blood samples from grid 10 were collected less frequently

We used the minimum number of individuals known to be alive (MNA) during a 3-day trapping session each month as an index of population abundance for both deer mice and voles (cf.

Two species of vole occur at Cascade, Microtus pennsylvanicus and Microtus montanus. The only reliable morphological character distinguishing the two species is the presence of an extra cusp on the upper middle molar in M. pennsylvanicus

Analyses

To evaluate if the frequency of vole occurrence [absence (MNA = 0) and presence (MNA ≥1)] differed among months over the 14 years of sampling at each grid, a Chi-square goodness of fit test was used, assuming equal probability of occurrence each month. A Monte Carlo simulation of the multinomial sampling distribution (100,000 permutations) was used to estimate the relative probability for grids where the expected frequency was less than five during any month. General linear models (GLM) were used to determine if vole MNA and deer mouse MNA and ESAP differed among months. The relationships of deer mouse MNA with vole MNA and occurrence were evaluated using Spearman correlation and GLM, respectively.

To evaluate the role of vole MNA and occurrence on deer mouse ESAP, we first identified an optimal model to explain the relationship between deer mouse MNA and ESAP, a logarithmic relationship. We then determined if that model could be improved by vole MNA and occurrence, by examining the residual variation in deer mouse ESAP. The relationships of residual deer mouse ESAP with vole MNA and occurrence were explored using linear regression and GLM, respectively.

Chi-square analyses and Monte Carlo simulations were undertaken using R (

Results

The total numbers of individuals trapped at all three trapping grids combined for this 14year period were 3,700 deer mice and 1,082 voles. Voles were captured in 43, 31 and 49% of the 170 months which rodents were trapped on grids 10, 11 and 12, respectively. Abundance of voles did not differ among months (GLM: grid 10, F 11,158 = 0.037, P = 0.999; grid 11, F 11,158 = 0.765, P = 0.675; grid 12, F 11,158 = 0.253, P = 0.993; Fig.

After controlling for significant relationships between deer mouse MNA and ESAP (logarithmic regressions: grid 10, R 2 = 0.482, F 1,50 = 47.534, P < 0.001; grid 11, R 2 = 0.362, F 1,168 = 95.92, P < 0.001; grid 12, R 2 = 0.067, F 1,168 = 12.104, P < 0.001), deer mouse ESAP was found to be unrelated to vole MNA (Table

Discussion

Although the effect of host abundance on prevalence of infectious disease has been the subject of much research (density-and frequency-dependent transmission; see

At all three trapping grids, there was a consistent negative relationship between the presence of voles and prevalence of antibody to SNV in deer mice, independent of vole MNA (a density-independent relationship). This result suggests that, during periods when voles are present, transmission of SNV among deer mice is reduced. The percentage reduction in ESAP among deer mice when voles were present was profound (mean range 54-64%). Accordingly, voles may be responsible for decreasing transmission of SNV in deer mouse populations by processes independent of their abundance (a density-independent relationship). In this study, we dealt with a small-mammal assemblage of only two to three species. Nevertheless, using species richness as a surrogate for diversity

For vector-borne pathogens (such as Lyme Disease or West Nile virus), mechanisms which underpin the dilution effect are relatively intuitive; a generalist vector which feeds upon a host population with variable reservoir competence. For directly transmitted pathogens, such as SNV, identifying mechanisms by which host diversity negatively influence pathogen prevalence are more challenging. The most probable mechanisms by which voles may cause a reduction in the prevalence of infection with SNV in deer mice are if (1) voles interact with deer mice, but are less competent hosts, and the number of daily encounter events among these rodents (intraspecific and interspecific) are relatively fixed, or (2) voles are dominant competitors causing behavioral or distributional shifts in deer mice which leads to reductions in intraspecific transmission

It would seem probable that the relative effect of a dilution host, or agent (cf.,

The transmission of directly transmitted zoonotic pathogens is often considered a function of host abundance (density-dependent and frequency-dependent transmission; see

When the relationship between deer mouse MNA and ESAP was controlled for, we found ESAP among deer mice was reduced when voles were present, independent of vole MNA. It is possible this relationship is due to an effect of environmental factors on ESAP among deer mice, rather than voles. Environmental factors undoubtedly influence deer mouse abundance directly

Though the antibody test we used to detect SNV in deer mice is broadly cross-reactive with all known New World hantaviruses, we assume deer mice are predominantly infected with SNV, an assumption supported by numerous studies

Communities of small mammals, at this study site and across Montana, are dominated by deer mice, and prevalence of infection with SNV is higher than in many studies elsewhere in the western USA

This study has specifically focused on how interspecific relationships influence prevalence of SNV on a temporal scale. Our focus, however, does not preclude intraspecific processes that contribute to variation in SNV prevalence, in addition to interspecific interactions. Prevalence of SNV is influenced by various population demographic factors, such as population size, age structure and sex (e.g.,

Conclusions

Our results are consistent with a dilution effect hypothesis, suggesting the presence of voles is associated with a reduction in prevalence of a hantavirus infection among deer mice by processes independent of vole abundance. Observations here are consistent with other studies of diversity and pathogen prevalence (e.g.,