Introduction

Hantaviruses are rodent-borne zoonotic agents that, in humans, result in hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome-HFRS (Europe and Asia) or hantavirus pulmonary syndrome-HPS (Americas)

In this investigation, two new mathematical models for hantavirus infection in rodents are formulated. The models include the dynamics of susceptible, exposed, infective, and recovered male and female rodents. These new models extend some recent epidemic models that have been applied to hantavirus infection in rodents

Their model is a system of ordinary differential equations for rodents infected with hantavirus in two different habitats: optimal and suboptimal. The population is subdivided into susceptible and infected juveniles and adults. Logistic growth is assumed but the population dynamics are driven by an annual periodic birth function and a 3-year periodic carrying capacity. The model of

The infection and persistence of hantavirus in its rodent host has little or no effect on survival

Our two new models are based in part on these recent models, however, they account for the differences in male and female seroprevalence and length of infectivity. The new features in our models are the inclusion of (i) males and females, (ii) an incubation or exposed class of individuals, (iii) and a recovered class of individuals (positive seroprevalence but not shedding the virus). The first model is a system of ordinary differential equations. The second model extends the first model to a system of stochastic differential equations (SDEs). Epidemic models that include an exposed class and a recovered class, in addition to susceptible and infective classes, are referred to as SEIR epidemic models. Unlike some of these recent models, we do not include spatial variation nor stages based on juveniles and adults.

In the next section, the male/female SEIR deterministic model is described. The basic reproduction number is computed for this model. For a special case of this model, the endemic equilibrium is computed. Then, in Section 3, a male/female SEIR stochastic model is formulated. Several numerical examples are presented in Section 4. The last section concludes with a summary.

SEIR deterministic model

The population is subdivided into males and females and further subdivided according to disease status: susceptible (S), exposed (E), infective (I), and recovered (R). Male rodents are denoted with a subscript m and females with a subscript f. For male rodents, the SEIR model takes the form

and for female rodents,

where density of males is N m = S m + E m + I m + R m , density of females is

is the birth function. A harmonic birth function is assumed, one of the most commonly used birth functions,

where b is the average litter size

In model (

The parameters γ m , γ f , β f , β m , and β mf account for the differences in the epizoology between males and females. Fighting between males results in greater contacts and spread of hantavirus. Also, the infectious period in females is thought to be shorter than in males. Therefore, we make the following assumptions regarding the contact rates and the infectious periods,

The incubation period is the same for males and females (1/δ) as well as the densitydependent death rate d(N) = a + cN, 0 < a < b/2, and 0 < c . A more general form for the density-dependent death rate can be assumed (e.g.,

Differential equations for the densities of males, females, and total population can be found by summing the individual differential equations for the states. The male, female, and total population densities satisfy the following differential equations:

respectively. It can be shown that there exists a globally stable positive equilibrium for the total population densities (see the appendix). At this equilibrium, the number of males equals the number of females, N m = K /2 = N f , and the total population density is N = K, where K is referred to as the carrying capacity. The carrying capacity K is the solution of

Therefore, every equilibrium for the full model (

One particular equilibrium with this property is the disease-free equilibrium (DFE), where S m = K /2 = S f and E j = I j = R j = 0, j = m, f. Whether the DFE is stable in the full model (

The stability of the DFE depends on the magnitude of the basic reproduction number. The basic reproduction number, ℛ 0 , is an important parameter in epidemiology. This parameter represents the number of secondary infections caused by one infective individual in an entirely susceptible population

The method of

To form the next generation matrix, states are divided into infectious, (E m , E f , I m , I f ), and noninfectious (S m , S f , R m , R f ). Then, on the basis of the infectious states at the DFE, entries in the matrix F represent the rate at which new infections are created and the entries in matrix V-1 represent the average length of time spent in a particular state. For our model, F and V-1 are 4 × 4 matrices,

The spectral radius ρ(FV-1 ) can be calculated,

It is important to note that the basic reproduction number, defined in (

In the special case, β mf = β m , males and females have similar dynamics. The basic reproduction number in this special case simplifies to

Notice that this latter expression for the basic reproduction number is the sum of two basic reproduction numbers, one for males and one for females. The endemic equilibrium is straightforward to calculate in this special case

for j = m, f. Thus, at the endemic equilibrium, the fraction of rodents that are antibody positive (seroprevalence) equals the proportion of rodents that are either infective or recovered.

An estimate for the magnitude of ℛ 0 can be obtained from formula (10). As an example, we consider the rice rat (O. palustris), the rodent host for Bayou virus. Let the time unit be 2 months which is the approximate gestation period (25 days) plus the time to reach sexual maturity (40-45 days)

The litter size for O. palustris ranges from two to seven with an average litter size of four (with five to six litters per year), b ≈ 4

When β m > β mf the value of ℛ 0 is even smaller, as can be seen from formula (9).

When δ is large relative to b/2, the incubation period 1/δ is short and the exposed class E may be ignored. The model in this case simplifies to an SIR model. The equilibrium fraction in the SIR model corresponding to (

In this case, the factor δ/(b/2 + δ) in formula (10) is equal to 1.

The estimate for ℛ 0 based on formula (10) assumes the proportion of seropositive males and females are equal. Our data suggest that this is not the case for New World hantaviruses. Thus, this estimate obtained from (10) provides only an upper bound for the ℛ 0 given in (9).

In the numerical simulations, we make the more realistic assumptions that β m > max{β mf ,β f } and β mf = β f . Contacts between two males are generally aggressive encounters to defend territory and result in greater transmission of the disease than contacts between two males or a male and a female.

SEIR stochastic model

We formulate a stochastic differential equation (SDE) model based on the deterministic formulation (1)-(

where W j , j = 1,2,...,8, are eight independent Wiener processes. A similar set of SDEs apply to the female population.

The coefficients a ij of the Wiener processes in the male/female SDE model are elements of the matrix A= (a ij ). Matrix A is an 8 × 8 matrix satisfying A = CV , the unique square root of the positive definite symmetric matrix CV . Matrix CV Δt is the approximate covariance matrix for the change in the states ΔX in time Δt.

To order Δt, CV

where E is the expectation (see, e.g.,

CV = C m 0 0 C f . Submatrices C m and C f are 4 × 4 tridiagonal matrices and 0 is a 4 × 4 zero matrix. Submatrix C m is B 2 + S m d+β f I f + β m I m -S m β f I f + β m I m 0 0 -S m β f I f + β m I m E m (δ + d) + S m β f I f + β m I m -δE m 0 0 -δE m δE m + I m γ m + d -γ m I m 0 0 -γ m I m γ m I m + R m d and submatrix C f is B 2 + S f d+β f I f + β mf I m -S f β f I f + β m I m 0 0 -S f β f I f + β m I m E f (δ + d) + S f β f I f + β mf I m -δE f 0 0 -δE f δE f + I f γ f + d -γ f I f 0 0 -γ f I f γ f I f + R f d , where d ≡ d(N).

The system of Itô SDEs can be easily seen to be consistent with the ordinary differential equation model (

Numerical examples

Three sets of figures illustrate the dynamics of the deterministic and the stochastic SEIR epidemic models. Parameter values are chosen in accordance with the epizoology of the rice rat (O. palustris) and Bayou virus. The basic time unit is chosen as 2 months, a time period approximately equal to the gestation period plus the time for rodents to become sexually mature. For a bimonthly time period, we choose δ = 4(1/δ = 2 weeks) and b = 4 (average litter size). Other parameter values are chosen in a realistic range, but estimates for them are not known. We assume that the contact rate for males is five times that for females β m = 5β f and β mf = β f ; the infectious period for males is twice that for, females, 1/γ m = 2 1/γ f ; and the carrying capacity is K = 1000 animals. The remaining parameter values are chosen so that a reasonable estimate is obtained for ℛ 0 .

β m = 0.01, γ m = 0.5, a = 0.01, and c = 1.99 × 10 -3 .

With these parameter values, the basic reproduction number is ℛ 0 = 1.38 (based on formula Because ℛ 0 > 1, the DFE with S m = 500 = S f is not stable. However, there is a stable endemic equilibrium, as illustrated in the numerical simulations in Fig.

One sample path of the stochastic SEIR epidemic model is graphed in Fig.

In Fig.

Conclusion

Hantavirus seroprevalence in wild rodent populations is relatively low, ranging from 5 to 12% in C. laucha in Paraguay

It is clear from calculation of the basic reproduction number (9) that the carrying capacity K is an important parameter that affects disease outbreaks in rodent populations. The importance of the carrying capacity was also shown in the hantavirus models studied by

It follows that Because ϵ is arbitrary, solutions N m (t) and N f (t) approach the unique positive equilibrium K/ 2. Solution to the deterministic SEIR epidemic as a function of time. An endemic equilibrium for males: 357.1, 47.7, 76.2, 19.1, and females: 456.4, 14.5, 19.4. 9.7, is reached. The total population size at equilibrium equals the carrying capacity K = 1000. Seroprevalence is 12.5% at the endemic equilibrium. One sample path of the stochastic SEIR epidemic model. The parameter values and initial conditions are the same as in Fig.